---
layout: post
title: Wedding ceremony (Friday, 2024-07-12, 13:30)
author: goujou
date: 2024-03-21
custom_css:
- boda
---

## Friday, 2024-07-12, 13:30
The official ceremony will take place at 13:30 at the [castle in Neuhaus-Schierschnitz](https://www.coburg-rennsteig.de/poi/burg-neuhaus).
**Guests are supposed to arrive no later than 13:00.**
The ceremony will last about 45-60 minutes.

- **People**
    The castle allows no more than 50 guests, which means that some party guests will not be able to follow the official ceremony.
    Please carefully check your invitation.

- **Location**
    The location is a castle from the 14th century, which comes with some consequences.
    For once, it is located on a small hill and parking is allowed only at the foot of the hill, directly after the entrance gate.
    Only in special cases cars are allowed to drive all the way up to the castle, for instance to deliver bride and groom and other people who can walk badly uphill.
    Please get in touch with us if you needs to drive all the way up.
    Keep in mind that an uphill walk of about five minutes can become cumbersome depending on the type of shoes you choose.

- **Beverages**
    The [Förderverein Burg Neuhaus](https://foerderverein-burg-neuhaus.de/) will offer beer and alcohol-free beverages as well as some champaign after the ceremony.

- **Children**
    Due to our setting at the castle accommodating up to 50 guests, we kindly ask that only immediate familiy children (Felix, Clara, Bastian, Amelie) join us for the ceremony.
    We will arange a child care for the other little ones at the hotel in the meanwhile.
    Should you have any concerns or questions or want to lend us a hand, feel free to reach out to us.


- **Transportation**
    We will organize the transport from the hotel to the castle with departure at the hotel at 12:45.
    Guests who organize their arrival to the castle on their own are advised not to arrive later than 13:00 at the castle.
    Private parking is allowed only at the parking lot at the foot of the castle hill directly after the entrance gate to the right.
    After the ceremony there will be an organized service to bring the guests back to the hotel to the wedding party.

    Please let us know whether you plan to use the organized transportation service to or from the castle or both to simplify our planning.


